---
layout: post
title:  "Dynamite and Nobel"
excerpt: "In 1883, Swedish playwright and poet August Strindberg (1849–1912) penned an homage to Alfred Nobel (1833–96), the Swedish-born inventor of dynamite. In “Folkupplagan,” or “Popular edition,” Strindberg used a publishing metaphor to favorably compare dynamite, “a huge popular edition, constantly renewed in a hundred thousand copies,” with gunpowder, “a small edition published for the nobles and the princely houses.”1 Nobel, in Strindberg’s estimation, had unwittingly provided ordinary working people with the means— inexpensive, easily available, and safe to handle,—to fight oppression and tyranny. Indeed, only two years earlier, a group of Russian populists organized into the People’s Will had used Nobel’s new invention to assassinate Tsar Alexander II on the streets of St. Petersburg. And in the coming decades, dynamite was the weapon of choice among a wide range of Russian revolutionaries.2 Strindberg himself was no stranger to violent controversy. Declaring himself in 1880 a “socialist, a nihilist, a republican, anything that is opposed to the reactionaries,” he stood trial for blasphemy in 1884 after publishing a collection of short stories on marriage that challenged existing gender and sexual norms and portrayed the Lutheran church as a tool of the rich to fleece the Swedish masses."
---

# Welcome

In 1883, Swedish playwright and poet August Strindberg (1849–1912) penned an homage to Alfred Nobel (1833–96), the Swedish-born inventor of dynamite. In “Folkupplagan,” or “Popular edition,” Strindberg used a publishing metaphor to favorably compare dynamite, “a huge popular edition, constantly renewed in a hundred thousand copies,” with gunpowder, “a small edition published for the nobles and the princely houses.”1 Nobel, in Strindberg’s estimation, had unwittingly provided ordinary working people with the means— inexpensive, easily available, and safe to handle,—to fight oppression and tyranny. Indeed, only two years earlier, a group of Russian populists organized into the People’s Will had used Nobel’s new invention to assassinate Tsar Alexander II on the streets of St. Petersburg. And in the coming decades, dynamite was the weapon of choice among a wide range of Russian revolutionaries.2 Strindberg himself was no stranger to violent controversy. Declaring himself in 1880 a “socialist, a nihilist, a republican, anything that is opposed to the reactionaries,” he stood trial for blasphemy in 1884 after publishing a collection of short stories on marriage that challenged existing gender and sexual norms and portrayed the Lutheran church as a tool of the rich to fleece the Swedish masses.3

When creationist geologist George McCready Price described the convergence of evolutionary ideas and Marxism as “Red Dynamite” decades later, he surely knew that Alfred Nobel had invented that explosive and that it was employed by opponents of the established political, economic and social order. He was also well aware of the associations commonly made between socialism, evolution, atheism, and immorality. As an amateur geologist, Price also might have known that the key ingredient that Nobel added to nitroglycerine to make the compound stable was diatomaceous earth, a sedimentary deposit made up of fossilized diatoms, a single-celled aquatic algae that evolutionary geologists date as far back as the Jurassic period.4 What Price may not have known, however, is just how intimately tied together were Alfred Nobel, evolutionary ideas, alleged blasphemy, and working-class revolution in Russia. The real, historical context of dynamite, that is, provides an illuminating entryway into the history of the red dynamite metaphor.

Alfred Nobel spent much of his childhood in St. Petersburg, Russia, where his engineer father did a brisk business selling naval mines to the Czarist regime of Nicholas I during the Crimean War.5 The young Nobel was tutored by leading figures in science and became fluent in six languages. When the family returned to Sweden, Alfred traveled to the U.S., Britain, and Germany, where he received further training in chemistry. Not surprisingly for a cosmopolitan scientist, inventor, and businessman in the mid-nineteenth century, Nobel became an avowed evolutionist and, like Strindberg, a critic of established religion. One indication of the former is Nobel’s personal library, part of which is today on display at the Nobel Foundation in Stockholm. His books included Darwin’s On the Origin of Species (1859) and an approvingly annotated copy of Haeckel’s History of Creation (1876), a popular defense of Darwin’s ideas. Nobel also kept a philosophical notebook, which contains his jottings on a wide range of thinkers, from Greek materialist Democritus to the Prussian geographer and philosopher of science Alexander von Humboldt, who profoundly influenced Darwin. On the question of why people believe in God, Nobel wrote, “Aristotle attributes it to fear, Voltaire to the desire of the more clever to deceive the stupid.” An indication that Nobel tended to side with Voltaire comes in his comments on the scientific method, which he understood, in the most general terms, as a study of similarities and differences. “The only exception to this rule is religious doctrine,” Nobel wrote, “but even this rests on the similar gullibility of most people.”6