---
layout: post
title:  "In Mexico with Tom Cantor"
tags: ["Deleted Scenes"]
excerpt: "It is the afternoon of November 16, 2012, and we have just stopped at the Mexican border. We’re in the tiny town of Tecate, California, in the shadows of Tecate peak, which the native peoples of this area called Kuuchamaa. We’re about to cross into Tecate, Baja California, home of the eponymous beer and a slew of foreign-owned factories—maquiladoras—that run on cheap Mexican labor. For the last hour, we have driven through the hilly, scrubland of southeastern California. From the back seat, I have been interviewing Tom Cantor, owner of Scantibodies Laboratories, whose plant in Tecate manufacturers medical testing products. Through his Light and Life Foundation, Cantor is also the owner of the suburban San Diego-based Creation and Earth History Museum, formerly the property of the Institute of Creation Research (ICR). As we get out of the car to walk through the U.S. Customs and Border Protection station, Cantor is telling me how he converted to creationism as an undergraduate biochemistry major in the early 1970s at the University of California/San Diego."
---

It is the afternoon of November 16, 2012, and we have just stopped at the Mexican border. We’re in the tiny town of Tecate, California, in the shadows of Tecate peak, which the native peoples of this area called Kuuchamaa. We’re about to cross into Tecate, Baja California, home of the eponymous beer and a slew of foreign-owned factories—maquiladoras—that run on cheap Mexican labor. For the last hour, we have driven through the hilly, scrubland of southeastern California. From the back seat, I have been interviewing Tom Cantor, owner of Scantibodies Laboratories, whose plant in Tecate manufacturers medical testing products. Through his Light and Life Foundation, Cantor is also the owner of the suburban San Diego-based Creation and Earth History Museum, formerly the property of the Institute of Creation Research (ICR). As we get out of the car to walk through the U.S. Customs and Border Protection station, Cantor is telling me how he converted to creationism as an undergraduate biochemistry major in the early 1970s at the University of California/San Diego.

A key change in Cantor’s thinking about evolution came out a conversation with his physical chemistry professor at UC San Diego, the Nobel Prize–nominee Stanley Miller. In 1952, Miller and Harold Urey had conducted an experiment seeking to explain the origin of life on earth. They were testing ideas put forward by Soviet biochemist A. I. Oparin and British geneticist and Marxist J. B. S. Haldane. Based on the principles of dialectical materialism, these two had hypothesized that the inorganic conditions of early earth gave rise to organic molecules—a qualitative leap to life from non-life. By applying electrodes to a mix of gases in a “sparking chamber,” Miller and Urey succeeded in producing some amino acids, a hint that life could arise without God. As a well-read student in Miller’s class, Cantor took the opportunity to visit his famed professor’s office hours and ask him some tough questions about the limits of his results. To his amazement, Miller did not have a convincing answer. He ended the conversation by saying, “I do not know. I am still searching for how life began.” Walking out of Miller’s office, Cantor concluded that if his illustrious professor could not explain the origin of life without God, then God must have been involved.

As I listen to Cantor tell his story, I am impressed that he had the gumption and knowledge to question his professor. I am also thinking about what we share in common: our Jewish heritage and a Jewish sense of humor. When I turned on my digital recorder and asked Cantor if I could interview him, he chuckled and said, “I’m Terri Gross, and this is Fresh Air.” But I am also struck by the logical inference Cantor drew from that conversation with his Nobel Prize-winning professor. Science, it seems, was supposed to provide the truth with absolute certainty. If even eminent scientists were still looking for answers, then that truth must reside beyond science. For me, in contrast, it was that very process of “searching” that made science an endless adventure. When I was a kid, it meant walking for an hour with my brother and our friends to collect insects in Miller Meadow Forest Preserve, near my hometown of Oak Park, Illinois. Not knowing—and the curiosity it generated--made science exciting. It led me to say, at that tender age, when I wondered what I would do when I grew up, that “I’m going to be a scientist!” In any event, based on the research I had already done for this book, I had a hunch that Cantor’s creationist conclusions did not flow simply or even primarily from the intellectual limitations of Miller’s experiment.